[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we're going to look at the
confluence of different value
systems in our age, the
traditional, the modern,
and the postmodern
values that confront us.
My guest is Professor Huston
Smith, author of many books,
including "Beyond
the Postmodern Mind,"
"Forgotten Truth," "The World's
Religions," and "Why Religion
Matters."
Welcome, Huston.
>> It's good to be here.
>> It's good to be
with you again also.
It seems as if the major
value systems in our culture
now could be broken down
into traditional, modern,
and postmodern, and that they
each have unique constraints,
unique gifts or emphases that
are important for us today.
>> Yes.
I think that's exactly right.
To get these three stages that
intellectual historians divide
our past and present
into, up until the rise
of modern science, everybody
lived under the umbrella,
you might say, of a
traditional world view.
With the rise of modern science
in the 16th and 17th century,
a new era was inaugurated, and
we call that the modern period.
And that held sway until roughly
the middle of the 20th century
when it came to sort of phase
in to a third period, which
for lack of a more
accurate name,
has come to be called
the postmodern.
So those are the three standard
divisions in human history.
And you're quite right in
saying that each one had,
with respect to the others,
a particular genius,
a particular gift for exploring
one area of human experience--
all three areas are important.
Having delineated the three
periods chronologically,
let's go to the three important
things about human beings.
>> Yeah.
>> The first is, how do we win
our livelihood from the Earth,
the physical domain in
which our lives are set?
We can call that
the area of nature.
And a second inescapably
important area
is human relation.
And I'm not just talking about
one-on-one like we are here.
I'm talking about society.
How is it patterned?
How are the various
groups within it
to relate the position
in relation of it?
So now we have nature, and the
other inescapably important
point is society.
And then there's a third
that's a little more abstract,
but I think we can
see the importance.
How do we relate ourselves
to the whole thing?
The big picture?
Do we view it as a
prison or a paradise?
Is it personal or impersonal?
So now we have three periods--
traditional,
modern, postmodern--
and we have three
inescapable human problems--
nature, society, and
the big picture--
>> The cosmos.
>> Cosmos, that's good.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And so to come back to
the basic point, I think,
for us in this half hour, is
to realize that each of these
three periods had
its strong point.
It's genius for doing better
by one of these three problems
than did the other two periods,
and, by the same token,
doing worse by the
other two problems
than one of the others--
>> Mm-hmm.
>> --others did.
To complete this
overview, I think
that the modern
period, which saw
the inauguration of modern
science, did best by nature.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> I mean our forebearer
just couldn't come close
because they didn't
have the instruments.
OK.
The postmodern period
has done best, I think,
with social relationships.
Justice, rights, and so on.
>> We've seen all of these
social liberation movements
in the last--
>> Exactly.
>> --50 years.
The rise of feminism
and equal rights
for the various racial and
religious groupings and--
>> Exactly.
>> --for people of various
sexual orientations.
>> Right.
And we're so far
from where we should
be that it would be
premature to congratulate,
and yet a simple
look at history shows
that we are pouring
more energy, we
have more common concern about
that area than the people
in the other two periods.
I would like to come back
to this social justice
and the fairness
revolution, you might say,
but I need to
complete the overview.
So that leaves the
traditional society.
Now what were they good for?
What were they good at?
Now this is where I think we
make our big mistake today.
Certainly when I was getting
my formal education, why
the traditional people were
referred to as primitive.
We were in the
heyday of progress.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And Auguste Comte set the
stage when he divided all
history into the religious,
the metaphysical,
and the scientific, with truth
increasing as you went up
the scale.
Well, I think that
is a myth, and
that the traditional
peoples did have
their virtue and their insight
that we ignore at our peril.
So I think we've got
the framework before.
>> And if I were to summarize
the traditional viewpoint,
it might be something
like the eternal reality--
the Kingdom of Heaven
is what counts.
>> Thank you.
And I realized that
with that comment,
you were very delicately
and deftly completing
the overview I was trying
to get, because all I said
was that the traditional
people had their genius also,
but I didn't say what it was,
and you have filled that in.
It's the big picture.
And I think they
understood that intuitively
and gave it more dignity
than we either the modern
or the postmodern people have.
>> In Western society, it might
be said that this meant living
a life in accordance
with God's laws.
>> Absolutely.
That's one way to
put it, but the theme
is the same whatever
the vocabulary.
In the traditional view--
well if I could just
summarize their virtues,
quickly tick them
off, first they
felt that the world
and we human beings
have originated from
something greater than we are.
Call it God, Allah, or Brahman,
or Heaven, or whatever.
So we come trailing clouds
of glory as a poet said.
Second, that we are the--
that spirit is fundamental
and matter is secondary.
It's like iceberg that
obtrudes in a sea of spirit.
As I go through these, I'm
sure and both of our minds
we're seeing how it contrasts
with the modern view
of the big picture.
The third we belong
because we are spirit,
and the world is spirit.
So we're made of the same thing.
Third-- fourth, everything
is meaningful throughout,
because a superior being--
the great spirit or something,
however the vocabulary--
has power and goodness
coming together.
And it has such power, it
wouldn't make sense for it
to create a botched product.
So it's all meaningful,
and finally,
in the traditional view there
is a happy ending to life.
So those are the five
virtues, I think,
that the traditionalists
had a firmer
grasp on than we do today,
and it goes without saying,
but we've implied it, if
each of these three periods
had the brilliant
and its downsides,
too, why then the
sensible thing is
to run a net through
our history and lift out
the gold in each period
and let the dross sink back
into the sand--
>> Beautiful idea.
Huston, we're going
to take a short break.
>> Yes.
>> We'll be back.
We're back.
And Huston, you raised
a very interesting point
just before our break
that the idea of taking
a sieve, of finding the gold
in each of these great world
views, the traditional, the
modern, and the postmodern.
I think it's a
wonderful recognition,
but at the same token, it seems
as if from the perspective
of any one of these,
the others are no good,
they have a hard time seeing
the gold in each other.
>> That's very true.
And I will pick up on
that with our own kind,
because there's a saying--
well, I think it's true
that they old people--
and I've gotten to the stage
where I'm no longer saying
I'm growing old,
I am old, but they
are old I always think that
the world is going to the dogs.
So I have to remind myself that
there are things about our time
that we can be very proud
of, and that centers,
as we have said, in the
Fairness Revolution.
In 1919, the year
that I was born,
an Afro-American was
chained behind bars
next to the simian apes.
That couldn't have
been anywhere.
>> You mean in a zoo?
>> In a zoo.
Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Thank you for filling that in.
In the Brooklyn Zoo, actually.
That couldn't happen
anywhere in the world today,
there would just
be so much outrage.
And to come a little closer
to home, I was born in China,
as you know, and grew up
there, so I'm a missionary.
And in the 1930s, if a street
car was going through San
Francisco and came to a
stop and there were only
Chinese-Americans at
the stop, routinely--
no Caucasians, routinely
it would just pass them by.
I completed my teaching
career at the University
of California i Berkeley
where my chancellor
was Chancellor Tien, a very
respected Chinese-American who
spoke English with
a decided accent.
Now that's progress
in one lifetime.
And so that's the goal here,
and we ought not to overlook.
There are things about our
time we can be very proud of.
>> And yet, at the same time, it
strikes me that traditionalists
often accuse the modern people
and the postmodern people
of having no values at all, no
firm route of being cultural
relativists and going along
with the flow of things.
>> Yeah.
>> Rather than being
grounded in absolute values.
And you earlier said,
well the scientific--
the modern view has shown a deep
understanding of nature, but--
>> Absolutely.
An awesome understanding.
>> At the same time, we're
destroying the environment.
So one might say they've
missed the best point of all.
>> Well, that's our problem.
Not to see deeply
enough, because all times
are ambiguous.
Charles Dickens began his
book, "A Tale of Two Cities,"
with the line, it
was the best of times
and the worst of times.
And maybe I'm inclined
to think you can probably
say that about every
moment in history,
and you brought out that
huge ambiguity of our time.
Good thing-- well,
lots of bad things.
Our problem is, we
dwell on the bad
and we close our
eyes to the future.
>> Well--
>> Or to the good.
>> It strikes me also, if I
may, that even your description
of the traditional
values rings--
I mean, I accept those values
as you've described them,
but I imagine in
traditional times,
they were reinforced in a
very authoritarian manner
with all sorts of
ritual and things that--
what we're seeing now may be the
birth of something really new,
something authentically
mystical, something
authentically scientific
and authentically grounded
in an appreciation
for justice that
wouldn't be any of those three.
>> Well, we're back
to the product.
If we pass a sieve through
these three periods,
and you were looking ahead
bright-eyed to this golden age
where the virtue of each
period will be harmonized
and integrated,
and the shadow side
will be let fall to the past.
>> They're all pretty
good at seeing the shadow
of the others.
>> That's the nature.
[LAUGHS] That's our
tendency, mm-hmm.
>> And if I understand your
life's work correctly, Huston,
it's seeing the common
threads that runs through
the world's great
spiritual traditions.
And if I understand those
common threads in a nutshell,
correct me if I'm wrong, but
I think what they define is
the great mystical traditions.
>> That is true.
A friend of mine in religious
study told me something.
He said, Huston, there's
a rumor going around
that Huston can't really
be trusted because he's
got this optical defect--
he sees unity everywhere.
[LAUGHS] And I admit
to that, that I
like to see commonalities.
And so I do know
notice that, and I
do believe that what unites
these traditions, which are
very different on the surface--
obviously they're
not carbon copies,
and my book on their differences
is three times as big
it's on their unity,
but I love the unity
that I tried to lift out
in "Forgotten Truth."
And as you rightly
say, behind them
all is this mystical
strain of there being
another reality which
transcends our possibility
of conceptualizing clearly,
but which nevertheless we
can point to like fingers
pointing to the moon.
The distance between the tip
of the finger and the moon
is very great, but nevertheless,
the angle can be right.
And that's very important.
>> Mm-hmm.
It strikes me that that mystical
sense that we can point to,
we sometimes call it spirit, it
can be the ground or the basis,
the realm that informs
our inquiries into nature
and our sense of
justice and society.
>> It comes back to the point
which the traditionalists
were-- this is one
other good thing--
they realized that we are
the product of something
that is greater than we are.
And that infuses
life with dignity
that it would be a mistake
for us to overlook.
>> The postmodern era that we've
experienced for the last 50
years, it's sometimes associated
with the word deconstruct.
>> Right.
That's very true.
And we've already pointed out
very clearly and appreciatively
to its genius in giving
concern to social justice.
Maybe there's some post-colonial
guilt mixed in there,
never mind the
result is very good.
But with regard to
the big picture,
that's one of the places
where postmodernism has not
done well, because they want
to take things apart rather
than putting them together.
Now both processes
are important,
but we shouldn't forget that
it's easier to smash your face
than it is to create it.
And the basic
mistake is to think
that overviews, the
metaphysical views of the whole,
the big picture are oppressive.
Now granted they can be,
but the postmoderns have not
demonstrated that
they have to be,
and that's why we need to
bring their good point--
social justice--
together with an overview
on the view of
reality that would
both inspire us and unite us.
>> Well, when I
think of overviews,
I often think of metaphysics.
>> Yeah.
>> I know earlier when you
refer to Auguste Comte,
you said he distinguished
between the traditional era
and the metaphysical era.
>> Yeah.
>> How do you-- do you see
that as a valid distinction?
>> No.
His three were the
religious, the metaphysical,
and the scientific.
>> Yeah.
>> So the metaphysical, he in
his view of progress felt was
better than the religious,
but it was inferior
to the scientific.
>> Yeah.
>> So the only world view
that his scheme allowed is
the scientific world view,
but as we know or are coming
to know, it can deal only
with the physical universe.
>> Yeah.
Huston, I'm going to
have to interrupt you,
we're running out
of time once again.
We have eternal conversations--
>> I know.
>> When we're immortals in
Heaven, we'll still be--
>> We'll probably be doing this.
>> Thanks so much for being
with me, it's been a joy.
>> Well, it's like
heavenly here.
>> And thank you
for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]